hello I'm up to chapter six now the jump
to universality this chapter is about a
themed runs through so much of David's
work universality I can't get a grip on
just how well understood or
misunderstood or perhaps just
underappreciated this particular concept
of universality is you don't hear it
much you don't hear of it much I guess
it is underappreciated and I think this
chapter really is when it's understood
well enough provides an avenue towards
the solution of some philosophical
discussions one of those would be the
foretelling of the next chapter chapter
7 which is called artificial creativity
and there the discussion is in large
part about artificial general
intelligence but for now what we can say
is that and I'll probably say this again
in the next video the key issue with
artificial intelligence versus
artificial general intelligence is that
many people who are concerned about AI
Bernero sort are concerned it will be
better than us at everything possible
the argument goes like this
presently AI will be humans at chess now
every single time they play and at many
other games like go or whatever else III
in other words
dumb computers can beat us at mental
arithmetic that multiplying or dividing
big numbers or these days you can even
go online and they'll do calculus for
you they'll do integration faster than
you ever could they'll find derivatives
faster than you ever could I know I can
beat us at driving now it can probably
make a better cup of coffee than a
barista so there is a long long list of
things that can be automated in other
words things that digital computers or
narrow AI can accomplish more
efficiently than we can now the argument
it's a little bit slippery because what
some people then assume is if you create
a future AI which can do every task that
we can write a program for and program a
single artificial intelligence perhaps a
try
but with all of those then we have an AI
with superhuman capabilities across all
known capabilities and then you've got
an AGI that's a super intelligence right
no that's wrong and it's very badly
wrong the key capacity of a human being
is solving problems we do not yet have
an algorithm for in other words things
that cannot be automated in the list of
all a AI programs there is not a program
for tasks not yet thought of that could
need automation in other words a
creativity algorithm what does that have
to do with anything that would amount to
a jump to universality the topic of this
chapter a universal algorithm would not
be one that was a superset of all
currently existing known tasks but
rather something much sure her
presumably it would be an algorithm
which could simulate any other algorithm
it wouldn't be a big long list of other
algorithms it will be able to simulate
any other including algorithms for tasks
not yet thought of but you wouldn't be
able to specify the output of such an
algorithm because the algorithm would be
creative what it would do would be
unpredictable and that's what we are we
will come to that kind of universality
towards the end of this chapter I am
getting ahead of myself David begins
this chapter chapter 6 and different to
my other videos perhaps I won't actually
read directly from the first few pages
of this chapter with the discussion
about different languages and different
types of writing early kinds of writing
used symbols that represented whole
concepts and the vocabulary was limited
brining came after speech of course so
people would have had a language
presumably before they were able to
write it down sometime along the fall
writing was invented in fact that
language would have been universal what
it means for a language to be universal
is that anything and everything that can
possibly be thought or imagined can be
expressed in that language so I just
want to emphasize that again
universality is about the anything and
the everything and different kinds of
systems might be able to accomplish a
wide repertoire of different tasks
but until that repertoire of task
becomes all-encompassing infinite
everything all possible tasks it doesn't
have universality so language natural
language that we use and natural
languages that probably existed well
before English or writing systems
existed were Universal in this respect
now some people might want to pull the
breaks here and say well hold on there's
a whole bunch of things that we can't
express in language so I just want to
make a quick distinction about being
able to express something in practice
and being able to express something in
principle so qualia the most famous
example I suppose qualia are the
subjective way that things seem and if I
look out my window right now I can see
the sky looks blue but perhaps that blue
looks different to me in the way that it
looks to you the difference is in the
qualia our subjective experience of the
blue sky can't be put into words but
that's not a failing of the universality
of language that's simply a failure of
our imagination we haven't yet figured
out how to conjure the language in such
a way as to describe subjective States
it doesn't mean that it's impossible
using language it simply means we just
don't know how problems are soluble so
one day we will know how to do this now
putting all that aside early writing
systems had a finite number of symbols
that were essentially in one-to-one
correspondence with a bunch of objects
or concepts that people wanted to be
able to write down these are often known
as pictograms or hieroglyphics so a
picture of the Sun would represent the
Sun and a picture of a crown might mean
the king but if there was no picture in
that writing system for a concept or
object then there was nothing else that
could be done except invent a whole new
system in other words the number of
symbols would proliferate
such a system isn't Universal because at
any given point in time there would be
objects or concepts outside of that
system which could not be represented by
that system today Mandarin speakers and
others including
I can speak Japanese quite often and
people who could speak Korean quite
often use some traditional Chinese
characters the traditional Chinese
script numbers in the thousands as far
as I'm aware there's thousands of
different characters if you want to
learn to understand traditional Chinese
but it's rather fixed hence the word
traditional Korean students for example
at school throughout primary school in
high school learn something like 1,800
different characters in order to be able
to understand some of the language
that's used in their culture but Korean
students also learn another alphabet and
it's called Hangul and huncle being the
Korean alphabet consists of 24
characters now if you don't know
anything about Asian languages like
Chinese Japanese and Korean you might
look at the symbol side-by-side and
think that they are all pretty much the
same kind of system but in fact you'd be
very wrong Korean has far more in common
with the English script than it does
with the traditional Chinese script
there are 24 letters in the Korean
alphabet there are 26 letters in the
English alphabet and you rearranged the
symbols to literally represent any
object or any concept that you can
possibly articulate and if you run out
of words you simply rearrange the
symbols in order to invent another word
that universality so we have alphabets
where no new symbols need to be invented
we just rearrange the existing ones to
express anything we like or these things
called logograms or pictograms where you
need a whole new picture a whole new
symbol in order to represent a concept
or object so the former alphabets are
universal they let out pictograms or not
now for what it's worth as an aside
traditional Chinese can be read while
not actually being spoken by many
different Asian people indeed the first
invasion of Korea by the Japanese
happened in 1592 and the Chinese came to
the aid of the Koreans and at one point
they're well at a number of points there
were meetings of the Chinese Japanese
and Korean neither of them could speak
the other's language but they could
understand the traditional Chinese
script and this helped these three
factions communicate okay back to the
beginning of infinity David writes about
how early scribe
who invented alphabets probably never
realized the great advances they made
beyond hieroglyphics this chapter is
very much a historical overview of
significant jumps that have happened to
universality in various domains the
first of these were in fact the first
chronologically speaking was the jump to
universality that happened
evolutionarily namely in the DNA and
then in artifacts of humans including
symbolic ways of representing language
through to computation and finally
quantum computation so let me begin my
reading on page 127 where he's well into
describing the importance of alphabets
so David writes here it is sometimes
suggested that scribes deliberately
limited the use of alphabets for fear
that their livelihoods would be
threatened by a system that was too easy
to learn but perhaps that is forcing to
modern in interpretation on them I
suspect that neither the opportunities
nor the pitfalls of universality ever
occurred to anyone until much later in
history those ancient innovators only
ever cared about the specific problems
they were confronting to write
particular words and in order to do that
one of them invented a rule that
happened to be a universal such an
attitude may seem implausibly parochial
but things were parochial in those days
and indeed it seems to be a recurring
theme in the early history of many
fields that universality
when it was achieved was not the primary
objective if it was an objective at all
a small change in a system to meet a
parochial purpose that just happened to
make the system universal as well this
is the jump to universality just as
writing dates back to the dawn of
civilization so do numerals
mathematicians nowadays distinguish
between numbers which are abstract
entities and numerals which are physical
symbols that represent numbers but
numerals were discovered first they
evolved from tally marks or tokens or
stones which are being used since
prehistoric times to keep track of
discrete entities such as animals or
days I'll just pause there don't we all
remember in mathematics class throughout
high school learning the tally system I
know I do and it still goes on to that
it's a remarkably bizarre
the mathematics curriculum learn these
historical systems David speaks not only
here about
tally marks the very earliest ways of
learning how to record the number of
things as well as Roman numerals a
completely esoteric Bazaar system I
suppose the only reason for learning it
now is when you see old buildings that
have the age of the building recorded or
at the end of the credits in a
television show that tells you what year
the television show or the movie was
made in Roman numerals so David goes
through a lengthy exposition of the
tally system and then of the Roman
numeral system as well and he writes how
the Roman numeral system never achieved
universality now it might have if
vertical lists of Roman numerals have
been permitted where each new T was
something in the vertical list like an
exponent
both Archimedes and Apollonius got close
to inventing a universal system of
recording numbers but failed now you
should read those stories in the chapter
I think they're really really
interesting David writes about how
Archimedes probably did notice the
universality of his system but chose not
to allow it for bizarre reasons he
discusses some of the reasons why and
then I'll continue on page 133 so on
page 133 he talks about how Archimedes
chose not to make his system universal
for the following even more speculative
possibility he says any rights the
largest benefits of any universality
beyond whatever parochial problem it is
intended to solve come from its being
universal for further innovation an
innovation is unpredictable so to
appreciate universality at the time of
its discovery one must either value
abstract knowledge for its own sake or
expect it to yield
unforce evil benefits in a society that
rarely experienced change both those
attitudes would be quite unnatural but
that was reversed with the Enlightenment
whose quintessential idea is as I have
said that progress is both desirable and
attainable and so therefore is
universality be that as it may with the
Enlightenment parochialism and all
arbitrary exceptions and limitations
began to be regard
inherently problematic and not only in
science why should the law treat an
aristocrat differently from a commoner
a slave from a master a woman from a man
enlightenment philosophers such as Locke
set out to free political institutions
from arbitrary rules and assumptions
others tried to derive moral Maxim's
from universal moral expectations rather
than merely to postulate them
dogmatically thus Universal explanatory
theories of justice legitimacy and
morality began to take their place
alongside universal theories of matter
and motion in all cases universality was
being sought deliberately as a desirable
feature in its own right even a
necessary feature for an idea to be true
and not just as a means of solving a
parochial problem I'll pause there this
is remarkable it talks about how the
tradition of criticism that the
Enlightenment gifted us with must work
in concert with these jumps to
universality not only in the ways in
which a universal system of recording
numbers might be but universality across
all domains including most importantly
morality morality shouldn't be applied
differently to one person as compared to
another but rather everyone in the same
way
that's the universality where everyone
is treated in the same way universality
is important as a fundamental principle
upon which so many of our intellectual
domains rest and therefore the ways in
which problems will be solved a
roadblock is having rules that have
arbitrary exceptions the arbitrary
exception to any of these fundamental
universal principles are the very thing
that is going to stop progress and so
when they're spotted that's a great way
to correct an error if you can remove an
arbitrary rule such that your system
becomes universal you're going to make
progress I'll continue a jump to
universality that played an important
role in the early history of the
Enlightenment was the invention of
movable type printing movable type
consisted of individual pieces of metal
each embossed with one letter
the alphabet earlier forms of printing
had merely streamlined writing in the
same way that Roman numerals streamline
tallying each page was engraved on a
printing plate and thus all the symbols
on it could be copied in a single action
but given a supply of movable type with
several instances of each letter one
does no further metalwork one merely
arranges the type into words and
sentences one does not have to know in
order to manufacture type what the
documents that will it will eventually
print are going to say it is universal
okay so this is just another example of
universality in technology we have a
system of being up to print books that
no longer require us to etch into metal
or to bang a piece of metal out with the
entire page instead all you need is type
movable type little bits of metal each
of which has a letter on it letter
printed on it and you would have many
such letters I appear to be explaining
the blindingly obvious here but it's
important to understand the significance
of such a incremental change this
incremental change of going from going
from edging out the entire page on a
piece of metal to instead you think it's
a small change but it's it's a huge
change because suddenly you're getting
universality you go from the entire page
being etched onto a piece of metal which
then can be printed over and over again
to instead having individual pieces of
metal with letters on them and now you
can represent literally any possible
text that could ever be written unlike
in the first system so I'm going to skip
a little in these discussions people
talk about the the programmable loom as
well which David mentions as well so
I'll skip that and move straight on to
the history of the universal computer
and so I'm up to page 135 now and David
writes the most momentous such
technology as that of computers on which
an increasing proportion of all
technology now depends and which also
has deep theoretical and philosophical
significance the jump to computational
universality should have happened in the
1820s when the mathematician Charles
Babbage designed a device that he called
the difference engine a mechanical
calculator which represented decimal
digits by cogs
which could click into one of ten
positions his original purpose was
parochial to automate the production of
tables of mathematical functions such as
logarithms and cosines which were
heavily used in navigation and
engineering at that time they were
compiled by armies of clerks known as
computers which is the origin of the
word and when notoriously ever
error-prone the difference engine would
make fewer errors because the rules of
arithmetic would be built into its
hardware to make it print out a table of
a given function one would program is
only once with the definition of the
function in terms of simple operations
in contrast human computers had to use
or be used by both the definition and
general rules of arithmetic thousands of
times per table each time being an
opportunity for human error okay and
then David mentions in part there that
the difference engine was able to
calculate or compute the results of
different complex functions like cosines
and logarithms this based on the work of
somebody called brooke-taylor
and if anyone does mathematics at
university they have to go through
Taylor series a Taylor series is a
rather a remarkable concept where you
can take any old function that you like
it doesn't involve complex numbers any
old function that you like and you can
represent it s a series of
multiplications and additions and like I
say anyone has done undergraduate maths
has to go through many exercises and
repeatedly doing these Taylor series
expansions as they're called okay so I'm
gonna skip the next short part and David
writes about how the difference engine
was improved by someone making it
programmable Charles Babbage meant it
programmable and this new machine was
called the analytical engine and David
Riots Babbage and his colleague the
mathematician ada Countess of Lovelace
knew that this machine the analytical
engine would be capable of computing
anything that human computers could and
that this included more than just
arithmetic it could do algebra play
chess compose music process images and
so on it would be what is today called a
you
classical computer I shall explain the
significance of the proviso classical in
Chapter eleven when I discuss quantum
computers which operate at a still
higher level of universality neither
they nor anyone else for over a century
afterwards imagined today's most common
uses of computation such as the internet
word processing database searching in
games but another important application
they didn't foresee was making
scientific predictions the analytic
engine would be the analytical engine
would be a universal simulator able to
predict the behavior to any design
accuracy of any physical object given
the relevant laws of physics this is the
universality that I mentioned in Chapter
three
through which physical objects that are
unlike each other and dominated by
different laws of physics such as brains
and clothes ours can exhibit the same
mathematical relationships I'll pause
there here's one of the most
philosophically significant issues that
David raises in both the beginning of
infinity and the fabric of reality it is
one of the most contentious
philosophical claims even though it's
true that has been made over the years
by many different people from Babbage
and Lovelace here through tutoring
through to david deutsch and others and
that is this idea here said in the
sentence that i've just read that david
wrote where the analytical engine would
be a universal simulator
okay so able to predict the behavior and
model simulate the behavior of any
physical system in other words that
includes biological systems biological
systems are a kind of physical system
the brain is a kind of physical system
now here unless you are willing to
believe in supernatural explanations
then this tells us that computers are
able to simulate not even electronic
computers things like the analytical
engine can simulate the functioning of a
human brain and so they should be able
to be conscious whatever consciousness
is it must be a property of brains and
are made of atoms which are performing
computations at least the neurons are
performing the computations I'm going to
skip a little bit more and David writes
up to page 137 now Babbage and Lovelace
also thought about one application of
universal computers that has not been
achieved to this day namely so-called
artificial intelligence AI since human
brains are physical objects are baying
the laws of physics and since the
analytical engine is a universal
simulator it could be programmed to
think in every sense that humans can a
be it very slowly and requiring an
impractical e vast number of punched
cards nevertheless Babbage and Lovelace
denied that it could Lovelace argued
that the analytical engine has no
pretensions whatever to originate
anything it can do whatever we know how
to order it to perform it can follow
analysis but it has no power of
anticipating any analytical relations or
truths the mathematician and computer
pioneer Alan Turing later called this
mistake lady Lovelace's objection it was
not computational universality that
Lovelace failed to appreciate but the
universality of the laws of physics
science at the time had almost no
knowledge of the physics of the brain
also Darwin's theory of evolution had
not yet been published and supernatural
accounts of the nature of human beings
were still prevalent today there is less
mitigation for the minority of
scientists and philosophers who still
believe that AI is unobtainable
for instance the philosopher John Searle
has placed the AI project in the
following historical perspective for
centuries some people have tried to
explain the mind in mechanical terms
using similes and metaphors based on the
most complex machines of the day first
the brain was supposed to be like an
immensely complicated set of gears and
levers
then it was hydraulic pipes then steam
engines and telephone exchanges and now
the computers are our most impressive
technology brains are said to be
computers but this is still no more than
a metaphor so Searle and there is no
more reason to expect the brain to be a
computer than a steam engine a pause
there and this is even though an
unpopular opinion above
philosophers scientists academics people
engaged in the debate today I would
still say it's the overwhelming majority
of the man on the street who would say
that indeed it's impossible for a
computer to think in the way that people
can and that assuming that a what a
brain is doing is a kind of computation
is still a metaphor is that is best
thought of as a metaphor I think there
was a there's been an article that's
been going around recently and to this
effect to you sometimes appears in
popular science articles and that kind
of thing that the brain is doing
something special that the brain can't
possibly be a computer ok so let me
reread that last bit and continue this
is still no more than a metaphor say
Searle and there is no more reason to
expect the brain to be a computer than a
steam engine but there is a steam engine
is not a universal simulator but a
computer is so expecting it to be able
to do whatever neurons can is not a
metaphor it is a known and proven
property of the laws of physics as best
we know them and as it happens hydraulic
pipes could also be made into a
universal classical computer and so
could gears and levers as Babbage showed
by the way we should just acknowledge
the fact there that when David writes
it is a known and proven property the
laws of physics as best we know them he
proved that ok so that's his proof he
proved that the laws of physics in terms
of quantum the quantum laws of physics
you
okay we just need to acknowledge
something before we do move on I just
reread this section again where David
writes but hey computer ears so
expecting it to be able to do whatever
neurons can is not a metaphor
it has a known and proven property of
the laws of physics pause they're
important to realize that known and
proven property of the laws of physics
was proven by David Deutsch so that's
the seminal 1995 paper where he shows
how the field of computation what was
previously the mathematics of
computation if you like was in fact a
branch of physics because computers are
made out of atoms atoms obey the laws of
quantum theory so therefore there can be
such a thing as a quantum theory of
computation so let's continue David
writes ironically lady Lovelace's
objection has almost the same logic as
Douglas Hofstadter's argument for
reductionism see chapter 5 yet
Hofstadter is one of today's foremost
proponents of the possibility of AI that
is because both of them share the
mistaken premise that low-level
computational steps cannot possibly add
up to a higher level I that affects
anything the difference between them is
that they chose opposite horns of the
dilemma that that poses Lovelace chose
the false conclusion that AI is
impossible well Hofstadter chose the
false conclusion that no such AI can
exist okay so this is and this is also
I'll just pause des this is me speaking
this is also I think the mistake of some
people who are fascinated by meditation
and introspection that on introspection
they can't find an AI I first
encountered this idea with the brilliant
philosopher David Hume and David Hume
talks about that whenever he reflects on
his internal state he can find nothing
but a perception he has no perception of
the eye
he just has perceptions of everything
else now it is true that if you reflect
on yourself you don't find an eye
but the inability to find an eye isn't
the same as demonstrating the eye
doesn't exist it's exactly the same
error as searching for God everywhere
and assuming on the basis of searching
your entire bedroom
or your entire world of the universe's
you know it and being able to find God
but that is somehow a refutation of the
fact that God exists now there might be
other reasons to reject God but you
can't form an exhaustive search so your
introspection and being able to unable
to find the eye is not a refugee
refutation of the fact that the eye
exists there are better reasons a better
explanation for knowing the eye exists
mainly that the human being is a
universal explainer now when you are
introspecting and you're attempting
deliberately not to explain anything and
this is what meditators do to calm their
mind and to clear their mind of all
questions and to not contemplate
anything and to notice thoughts merely
as thoughts and not as part of oneself
they then conclude on that basis that
because there is no sensation of the
self but therefore there is no self
that's a mistake
there's a whole bunch of things we might
not have a sensation of but nonetheless
still exist we exist because we are we
are universal explainers and we can
explain anything it's the potential of
what we can do that gives us our selves
we'll come to the remarkable explanation
of what a person is towards the end of
this chapter as well it's a theme that
runs throughout the book we are
intimately connected tired with the
production of knowledge we intimately
tired with the physics of computation a
human being is the Nexus of these two
things in in in large part let me
continue David writes because of
Babbage's failure either to build the
universal computer or to persuade others
to do so an entire century would pass
before the first one was built during
that time what happened was more like
the ancient history of universality
although calculating machines similar to
the difference engine were being built
by others even before Babbage had given
up the analytical engine was almost
entirely ignored even by mathematicians
in 1936
cheering developed the definitive
theory of universal classical computers
his motivation was not to build such a
computer but only to use the theory
abstractly to study the nature of
mathematical proof and when the first
universal computers were built a few
years later it was again not out of any
special intention to implement
universality they were built in Britain
in the United States during the Second
World War for specific wartime
applications now I'm going to skip a bit
about the history of ENIAC the first
universal computer that was built using
vacuum tubes and David Wright after
after skipping a bit David writes it is
a remarkable fact that in that sense
that is to say ignoring issues of speed
memory capacity and input/output devices
the human computers of old the
steam-powered analytical engine with all
its little bells and whistles the room
sized vacuum computers of the Second
World War and present-day supercomputers
and your mobile phone I'll just add and
anything else that pretty much has a
computer in it all David Wright all have
an identical repertoire of computations
in other words they can do precisely the
same thing some will just do it faster
some will do it slower David writes
another thing that they all have in
common is that they are all digital they
operate on information in the form of
discrete values of physical variables
such as electronic switches being on or
off or cogs being at one of ten
positions the alternative analog
computers such as slide rules which
represent information as continuous
physical variables will once ubiquitous
but I hardly ever use today that is
because a modern digital computer can be
programmed to imitate any of them and to
outperform them in almost any
application the junk to universality in
digital computers has left analog
computation behind that was inevitable
because there is no such thing as a
universal analog computer now pause
there and just remark that the next
paragraph talks about error correction
and as I read through just keep in mind
the parallel we have with computation
and with epistemology
and I'd like to highlight the idea that
as you listen to this we think about how
critical rationalism the potpourri and
view of knowledge is very much like a
digital epistemology on the other hand
opponents of critical rationalism or all
opponents as far as I can tell
reject the core idea of pop hurryin
critical rationalism that true of
histology and try to substitute an
analogue epistemology let's see why so
I'll just read this section from David
and he writes having just talked about
analog versus digital computers and
their difference it's impossible to have
an analogue a universal analog computer
he says because that is because of the
need for error correction during lengthy
computations the accumulation of error
is due to things like imperfectly
constructed components thermal
fluctuations and random outside
influences makes analog computers wander
off the intended computational path this
may sound like a minor or parochial
consideration but it is quite the
opposite without error correction all
information processing and hence all
knowledge creation is necessarily
bounded error correction is the
beginning of infinity so pause there
that's that is so very important
potpourri and epistemology is digital
it's digital precisely because it gives
you our binary choice between the things
we know and the things we reject and no
longer know or we know a false knowledge
has that form knowledge allows for error
correction variants variant
epistemologies different epistemologies
reject that core idea the binary
black-and-white distinction between
truth and falsity the known and the
unknown an attempt to substitute in its
placed degrees of knowability degrees of
truth degrees of belief degrees of
justification this is where we get
probabilistic ideas in epistemology like
Bayesian ISM
that you can have a certain amount of
confidence but this is false this is an
analogue attempt at constructing
epistemology all of them can be rejected
because what we need is not a focus upon
how close we can get to the truth or how
close we can get to anywhere but rather
a way of correcting errors a way of
identifying what the errors are and
eliminating them and keeping what
remains that's digital I'll keep going
ok so I'll keep going but I'll just skip
past a lengthy part about exactly what
the problems with analog counting would
be so I'm gonna skip past that and David
goes through imagine a goatherd who's
trying to tally up the number of goats
in the herd by using an analog system
versus a digital system the the errors
accumulate in the analog system and
eventually you end up with the wrong
number compared to with a digital system
where you can correct the error and so
we get to we get back to computation
itself and David writes so all Universal
computers are digital and all use error
correction with the same basic logic
that I have described though with many
different implementations thus Babbage's
computers are signed only 10 different
meanings that the whole continuum of
angles at which a cogwheel might be
oriented making the representation
digital in that way allowed the cogs to
carry out error correction automatically
after each step any slight drift in the
orientation of the wheel away from its
ten ideal positions would immediately be
corrected back to the nearest one as it
clicked into place assigning meanings
that the whole continuum of angles would
nominally have allowed each wheel to
carry infinitely more information but in
reality information that cannot be
reliably retrieved is not really being
stored I'm skipping a paragraph and
David writes because of the necessity
for error correction all jumps to
universality occur in digital systems it
is why spoken languages build words out
of a finite set of elementary sounds
speech would not be intelligible if it
were analog it would not be possible to
repeat nor even to remember what anyone
had said nor therefore does it matter
that universal writing systems
perfectly represent analog information
such as tones of voice nothing can
represent those perfectly for the same
reason the sounds themselves can
represent only a finite number of
possible meanings for example humans can
distinguish between only about seven
different sound volumes this is roughly
reflected in standard musical notation
which has approximately seven different
symbols for loudness such as p m FF and
so on and for the same reason speakers
can only intend a finite number of
possible meanings with each other ins
another striking connection between all
those diverse jumps - universality is
that they all happened on earth in fact
all known jumps - universality happened
on the auspices of human beings except
one which I have not mentioned yet and
from which all the others historically
emerged it happened during the early
evolution of life genes in present day
organisms replicate themselves by a
complicated and very indirect chemical
route in most species they act as
templates for forming stretches of a
similar molecule RNA those then act as
programs which direct the synthesis of
the body's constituent chemicals
especially enzymes which are catalysts a
catalyst is a kind of constructor it
promotes a change among other chemicals
while remaining unchanged itself those
catalysts in turn control all the
chemical production and regulatory
functions of an organism and hence
define the organism itself crucially
including a process that makes a copy of
the DNA how that intricate mechanism
evolved is not essential here but for
definiteness let me sketch one
possibility about four billion years ago
soon after the surface of the earth had
cooled sufficiently for liquid water to
condense the oceans were being churned
by volcanoes meteor impact storms and
much stronger tides in today's because
the moon was closer they were also
highly active chemically with many kinds
of molecules being continually formed
and transformed some spontaneously and
some black catalysts one such catalyst
happened to catalyze the formation of
some of the very kinds of molecules from
which it itself was formed that catalyst
was not alive but it was the first hint
of life it had not yet evolved to be a
world targeted catalyst so it
accelerated the production of some other
chemicals including variants of itself
those that were best promoting their own
production
in inhibiting their own destruction
relatives for other variants became more
numerous they too promoted the
construction of variants of themselves
and so evolution continued gradually the
ability of these catalysts to promote
their own production became robust and
specific enough for it to be worth
calling them replicators evolution
produced replicators that caused
themselves to be replicated ever faster
and more reliably different replicators
began to join forces in groups each of
whose members specialized in causing one
part of a complex web of chemical
reactions whose net effect was to
construct more copies of the entire
group such a group was a rudimentary
organism at that point life was at a
stage roughly analogous to that of non
Universal printing or Roman numerals it
was no longer a case of each replicator
for itself but there was still no
universal system being customized or
programmed to produce specific
substances okay pause there sir David's
getting to how DNA itself evolved this
is a momentous event in the history of
the universe once we have replicating
once we have DNA that becomes universal
we are able to have evolution of all the
forms of life that we now have on earth
I'll continue reading David writes genes
are replicators that can be interpreted
as instructions in a genetic code
genomes are groups of genes that are
dependent upon each other for
replication the process of copying a
genome is called a living organism
thus the genetic code is also a language
for specifying organisms at some point
the system switched to replicators made
of DNA which is more stable than RNA and
therefore more suitable for storing
large amounts of information the
familiarity of what happened next can
obscure how remarkable and mysterious it
was initially the genetic code and the
mechanism that interpreted were both
evolving along with everything else in
the organisms but there came a moment
when the code stopped evolving yet the
organisms continued to do so at that
moment the system was coding for nothing
more complex and primitive single celled
creatures yet virtually all subsequent
organisms on earth to this day have not
only been based on DNA replicators but
have used exactly the same alphabet of
bases grouped into three base words with
only a small variation in the meaning of
those words
that means that considered as a language
for specifying organisms the genetic
code has displayed phenomenal reach it
evolved only to specify organisms with
no nervous systems no ability to move or
exert forces no internal organs and no
sense organs his lifestyle consisted of
little more than synthesizing their own
structural constituents and then
dividing in to two and yet the same
language today specifies the hardware
and software for countless multicellular
behaviors that had no close analog in
those organisms such as running and
flying and breathing and mating and
recognizing predators and prey it also
specifies engineering structures such as
wings and teeth and nano technologies
such as immune systems and even a brain
that is capable of explaining quasars
designing other organisms from scratch
and wondering why it exists I'll pause
there now I don't know if this is a well
understood area of biology I don't think
that it is exactly how the DNA molecule
is able to contain information
sufficient to describe not only bacteria
but everything through real human being
and a dinosaur and flying things and
swimming things it's rather remarkable
it has this kind of phenomenal reach as
David said in order to in the space of
all possible organisms that exist it
seems to have universality all organisms
that can be built out of the organic
material that you and I are built out of
okay but then David talks about how
early on on planet Earth
the evolution of DNA led to the
evolution of simple bacteria archaea
these things that lived in warm pools on
the surface of the earth most likely but
then for something like a billion years
a billion years nothing happened looking
literally just about nothing happened
the surface of the planet was covered in
bacteria but no multicellular organisms
evolved no plants no fish nothing why
why was there no selection pressure why
was this universality that was within
the code
DNA code why was it not exploited um
David writes on this problem reach
always has an explanation but this time
to the best of my knowledge the
explanation is not yet known if the
reason for the jump in reach was that it
was a jump to universality what was the
universality the genetic code is
presumably not Universal for specifying
forms of life since it relies on
specific types of chemicals such as
proteins they further to sort of pause
there so of course it's not Universal
for you know science fiction writers
like to write about the possibility of
having organisms made out of silicon
well DNA contains no silicon so can't be
universal for all forms of life because
presumably you'd be able to make or
perhaps perhaps you could make a
life-form out of silicon but in
particular as he says they're our forms
of life are made of proteins so the DNA
codes for different kinds of proteins or
the genes code for a specific protein
and so unless the life-form is made out
of proteins then the DNA isn't universal
for all forms life but maybe it's
universal for all forms of life made out
of proteins David writes um could it be
a universal constructor perhaps it does
manage to build with inorganic material
sometimes such as the calcium phosphate
in bones or the magnetite in the
navigation system inside a pigeon's
brain biotechnologists are already using
it to manufacture hydrogen and to
extract uranium from seawater it can
also program organisms to build
constructors outside their bodies birds
build nests beavers build dams perhaps
it would be possible to specify in the
genetic code an organism whose life
cycle includes building a
nuclear-powered spaceship or perhaps not
I guess in a some lesser and yet and yet
understand I guess it has some lesser
and not yet understood universality in
1994 the computer scientist of molecular
biologist Leonard Alderman designed and
built a computer composed of DNA
together with some simple enzymes and
demonstrated it was capable of
performing some sophisticated
computations at the time Alderman's DNA
computer was arguably the fastest
computer in the world further it was
clear that a universal classical
computer could be made in a similar way
hence we know that whatever that other
universality of DNA system the DNA
system was the universality of
computation had also been inherent in it
for a billion years without ever being
used until all Adelman used it sorry
Adelman
the mysterious universality of DNA as a
constructor may have been the first
universality to exists but of all the
different forms of universality the most
significant physically is the
characteristic universality of people
namely that they are universal
explainers which makes them Universal
constructors as well what we have to
pause there don't we this is amazing and
if this is I think one of the least
understood but most significant parts of
the entire book it is a discovery of
David Deutsch a philosophical and
scientific discovery it's a moral
discovery as well I mean it stretches
across all domains this explanation of
what a human is what a person is I
should say what a person is all humans
are people but all people share this the
universality of people and there might
be other things as well beyond this but
this is absolutely crucial to appreciate
that any alien intelligence that we find
any so-called supernatural being any
artificial general intelligence that we
find it must have this capacity this
capacity to be a universal explainer
which means that anything that can be
explained can be explained by us and
given David's discovery of how
computation is a part of physics and you
can have a physical system namely a
quantum computer that can simulate the
behavior of any other system and we as
universal explainers can perform we we
we can do exactly what a universal
computer can do we can act as a cheering
machine and a cheering machine can
simulate any
physical so the universal Turing machine
can simulate any physical system so this
is a poorly understood area of physics
philosophy morality computation this
idea of what people are people are
universal explainers a universal
explainer is a another level of
abstraction above the universal computer
we can do what a universal computer can
do a universal computer doesn't really
need to do much more than make marks on
paper and we can do that we can make
marks on paper so we can do what a
universal computer can do beyond that we
can also explain stuff and an
explanation is a kind of computation but
you can be a universal computer without
being a universal explainer ok the the
computer on which I'm recording this
right now is not a universal explainer
but it's Universal computer now what's
needed for that extra step we don't know
ok it's something to do with creativity
it's probably something to do with free
will these things are tied up possibly
intimately together in ways that we
don't fully understand yet but this is a
massive advance in the philosophy of
what's going on
that people are universal explainers so
let me just read this last paragraph
again I'll read it in its entirety
the mysterious universality of DNA as a
constructor may have been the first
universality to exist but of all the
different forms of universality the most
significant physically is the
characteristic universality of people
namely that they are universal
explainers which makes them Universal
constructors as well the effects of that
universality are as I have explained
explicable only by means the full gamut
of fundamental explanations it is also
the only kind of universality capable of
transcending its parochial origins
Universal computers cannot really be
Universal unless there are people
present to provide energy and
maintenance indefinitely and the same is
true of all those other technologies
even life on earth will eventually be
extinguished unless people decide
otherwise only people can rely on
themselves into the unbounded future and
that's the end terminology there we'll
just read the terminology the jump to
universality is the tendency of
gradually improving systems to undergo a
sudden or large increase in the
functionality becoming Universal in some
domain ok yes sir
generally progress happens incrementally
and this is what's happening in AI at
the moment so I is having this
incremental improvement improvement
improvement but the jump to universality
isn't just it's not expected by that
that ingry it's not expected to just
happen simply by virtue of the fact that
you've had a large number of incremental
improvements what we need for that jump
to universality from AI to AGI it's a
philosophical incremental improvement
and that's the mistake that people work
in the areas seem to not have quite
cottoned on to now David also mentions
there that all of this
this human universality is explicable
only by means of the full gamut of
fundamental explanations and where do
you get those fundamental explanations
the fabric of reality which has just had
the audio book recorded which I would
encourage everyone to get ahold of the
fabric of reality of course goes through
our most fundamental explanations of
reality and that's what just mention
this so if you really want to understand
the nature of a person you should have
some understanding of the theory of
computation the theory of evolution
quantum theory and the theory of
knowledge okay or epistemology this was
a remarkable chapter and it's really
leading us straight into chapter 7 about
artificial creativity which is going to
be a very exciting chapter all about
artificial general intelligence so I
look forward to seeing you again then
bye-bye
you